doc/Sphinx/contribute.rst, before:

Contribute
----------

Contributions to the development of :program:`Smilei` are welcome.

* `Chatroom <https://riot.im/app/#/room/!LQrdVpOJEohPSWMlmf:matrix.org>`_ for discussion and sharing.
* `GitHub issues <https://github.com/SmileiPIC/Smilei/issues>`_ for bugs and requests.
* `GitHub fork <https://github.com/SmileiPIC/Smilei/issues>`_ to develop new features
  (you can make a `pull request <https://github.com/SmileiPIC/Smilei/pulls>`_ when
  your features are ready).

Guidelines for new developments are:

* Write clear, commented code, or self-explanatory.
* Write the documentation corresponding to the new features, if any.
* Make validation cases, and reference data, corresponding to the added features.

----

Write documentation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The documentation you are currently reading is written in the
`reStructuredText <www.sphinx-doc.org/en/stable/rest.html>`_ (rST) language, and included
in the main :program:`Smilei` repository. This is a fairly simple markup language. You
can see examples from the source files, which are located in the
``doc/Sphinx`` folder and have the extension ``.rst``.

To transform it into an *html* website, it is
processed using the `sphinx <www.sphinx-doc.org>`_ python package that you may have to
install.
If you have sphinx installed, you may simply go to the
main :program:`Smilei` folder from a command line terminal, then run the command

.. code-block:: bash

   make doc

This creates a local *html* website accessible in the ``build/html/`` folder. Simply
open the ``build/html/index.html`` file in your favorite web browser.

To document a new feature, please modify the file ``namelist.rst`` to indicate the
syntax changes in the input file. If the feature requires detailed physical or numerical
background, you may add a new page in the "Understand" section of the website.
To do that, create a new ``.rst`` file, then reference it in the table of contents
located in ``index.rst``.

----

.. _Validation:

Validate your changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:program:`Smilei` has a system of test cases combined with reference results that must be
validated, ideally, for every *push* submitted to the git repository.
These **test cases** are located in the ``benchmarks/`` folder.

Each benchmark has an associated **validation file**, written in *python*, which contains
instructions on how to produce an analysis of the results that can validate that particular
benchmark. The validation files are located in the ``validation/analyses/`` folder.
They have the same name as the benchmarks, with the prefix ``validate_``.

Once a benchmark has been run, the corresponding ``validate_*`` file is run in *python*
to compare the analysis results with a **reference file** located in the folder
``validation/references/``. Note that the analysis produced by the ``validate_*`` file 
can also be used to generate the reference file the first time.

**When you code a new feature, you must provide a new benchmark, the corresponding
analysis and reference file**

To make this process easier, a *python* script is available.

.. rubric:: How do I use the ``validation.py`` script?

The script ``validation/validation.py`` can do three things:

* generate validation reference(s) for given benchmark(s)
* compare benchmark(s) to their reference(s)
* show visually differences between benchmark(s) and their reference(s)

Usage:

..
  
  .. code-block:: bash
  
    python validation.py [-c] [-h] [-v] [-o <nOMP>] [-m <nMPI>] [-b <bench> [-g | -s]] [-r <nRestarts>]
  
  * | Option ``-b <bench>``:  
    | ``<bench>`` : benchmark(s) to validate. Accepts wildcards.  
    | ``<bench>=?`` : ask input for a benchmark  
    | DEFAULT : All benchmarks are validated.   
  
  * | Option ``-o <nOMP>``:
    | ``<nOMP>`` : number of OpenMP threads used for the execution
    | DEFAULT : 4  
  
  * | Option ``-m <nMPI>``:
    | ``<nMPI>`` : number of MPI processes used for the execution
    | DEFAULT : 4
  
  * Option ``-g``: Generation of references only (no validation)
  * Option ``-s``: Plot differences with references only (no validation)
  * Option ``-c``: Compilation only (no run, no validation)
  * Option ``-r <nRrestarts>``: Force the simulation to be broken in several restarts.
  * Option ``-v``: Verbose
  * Option ``-h``: Help


Exit status of the script:

..
  
  * 0  validated
  * 1  validation fails
  * 2  execution fails
  * 3  compilation fails
  * 4  bad option


Examples:

..
  
  .. code-block:: bash
  
    ./validation.py -v
  
  Compiles and validates all cases in verbose mode.
  
  .. code-block:: bash
  
    ./validation.py -v -b tst1d_00_em_propagation.py 
  
  Validates only the benchmark ``tst1d_00_em_propagation.py``.
  
  .. code-block:: bash
  
    ./validation.py -v -b tst1d_00_em_propagation.py -g
  
  Generates the reference file for the benchmark ``tst1d_00_em_propagation.py``.
  
  .. code-block:: bash
  
    ./validation.py -v -b tst1d_00_em_propagation.py -s
  
  Runs the benchmark ``tst1d_00_em_propagation.py``, and plots the differences with the reference file.



.. rubric:: What does ``validation.py`` actually do?

It creates a new ``validation/workdirs`` directory (that may be freely deleted later).

It compiles the code:

..

  If the "workdirs" directory lacks a smilei binary, or it is too old,
  then the "workdirs" is backed up, and a new compilation occurs.
  The compilation output is logged in ``compilation_output``.
  If compiling errors occur, ``compilation_errors`` is created and the script exits with status 3.

It runs each benchmark:

..

  If the directory ``wd_<benchmark>/<o>/<m>`` does not exist then:
  
  * it is created.
  * ``smilei`` is executed in that directory for the requested benchmark.
  * if execution fails, the script exits with status 2.

It analyses the results (for each requested benchmark) using the ``validate_*`` script:

..

  * If requested to compare to previous references (default option), the analysis
    is compared to the reference data.
  * If requested to generate references (option ``-g``), the analysis is stored
    as reference data.
  * If requested to show differences to previous references (option ``-s``),
    the analysis is plotted vs. the reference data.


.. rubric:: How should I make the ``validate_*`` script?

The ``validate_*`` script should load the simulation results using whatever means suits
the benchmark the best. In many cases, the :doc:`happi <post-processing>` module is
employed to extract diagnostics results.

Any *python* instructions may be used to process the simulation results. Once the data
has been crunched into a meaningful value, string, or array, then it must be passed to the
following predefined function:

.. py:method:: Validate( description, data, epsilon )

  * ``description``: a string describing the data
  * ``data``: a float, a *numpy* float array, or any other python data
  * ``epsilon`` (optional): acceptable difference between data and reference

The ``data`` passed to this function constitutes the *analysis* that is compared to previous
reference files. It is the same analysis that is used to generate those reference files
in the first place.

Commit message:

Updated list of publication & description of how to update it in the contribute section

doc/Sphinx/contribute.rst, after:

Contribute
----------

Contributions to the development of :program:`Smilei` are welcome.

* `Chatroom <https://riot.im/app/#/room/!LQrdVpOJEohPSWMlmf:matrix.org>`_ for discussion and sharing.
* `GitHub issues <https://github.com/SmileiPIC/Smilei/issues>`_ for bugs and requests.
* `GitHub fork <https://github.com/SmileiPIC/Smilei/issues>`_ to develop new features
  (you can make a `pull request <https://github.com/SmileiPIC/Smilei/pulls>`_ when
  your features are ready).

Guidelines for new developments are:

* Write clear, commented code, or self-explanatory.
* Write the documentation corresponding to the new features, if any.
* Make validation cases, and reference data, corresponding to the added features.

But you can also contribute by updating the list of publications on :program:`Smilei`'s website.
This is quite simple and we first explain how to do so before going into the details of further developments.

----

.. _HowToListMyPaper:

How can I add my publication to the publication list on Smilei's website?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Adding your paper to the publication list on :program:`Smilei`'s website consists in modifying the code documentation.
To really understand how to do this, you can read next section.
Here we quickly explain the simplest way for you to add your publication to the list.
It consists in directly updating the file ``doc/Sphinx/material.rst`` by adding a block such as::

    .. rst-class:: bigcitation

    .. [MyNameYEAR]

        M. Name, A. Collaborator and B. Collaborator,
        `Title of my paper`,
        `Reference of the Paper X, XXXX (Year) <link to the paper>`_,
        `arXiv:xxxx.xxxx <https://arxiv.org/abs/xxxx.xxxx>`_

You will then need to make a pull request to share your update.

----

.. _HowToWriteDoc:

Write documentation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The documentation you are currently reading is written in the
`reStructuredText <www.sphinx-doc.org/en/stable/rest.html>`_ (rST) language, and included
in the main :program:`Smilei` repository. This is a fairly simple markup language. You
can see examples from the source files, which are located in the
``doc/Sphinx`` folder and have the extension ``.rst``.

To transform it into an *html* website, it is
processed using the `sphinx <www.sphinx-doc.org>`_ python package that you may have to
install.
If you have sphinx installed, you may simply go to the
main :program:`Smilei` folder from a command line terminal, then run the command

.. code-block:: bash

   make doc

This creates a local *html* website accessible in the ``build/html/`` folder. Simply
open the ``build/html/index.html`` file in your favorite web browser.

To document a new feature, please modify the file ``namelist.rst`` to indicate the
syntax changes in the input file. If the feature requires detailed physical or numerical
background, you may add a new page in the "Understand" section of the website.
To do that, create a new ``.rst`` file, then reference it in the table of contents
located in ``index.rst``.

----

.. _Validation:

Validate your changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:program:`Smilei` has a system of test cases combined with reference results that must be
validated, ideally, for every *push* submitted to the git repository.
These **test cases** are located in the ``benchmarks/`` folder.

Each benchmark has an associated **validation file**, written in *python*, which contains
instructions on how to produce an analysis of the results that can validate that particular
benchmark. The validation files are located in the ``validation/analyses/`` folder.
They have the same name as the benchmarks, with the prefix ``validate_``.

Once a benchmark has been run, the corresponding ``validate_*`` file is run in *python*
to compare the analysis results with a **reference file** located in the folder
``validation/references/``. Note that the analysis produced by the ``validate_*`` file 
can also be used to generate the reference file the first time.

**When you code a new feature, you must provide a new benchmark, the corresponding
analysis and reference file**

To make this process easier, a *python* script is available.

.. rubric:: How do I use the ``validation.py`` script?

The script ``validation/validation.py`` can do three things:

* generate validation reference(s) for given benchmark(s)
* compare benchmark(s) to their reference(s)
* show visually differences between benchmark(s) and their reference(s)

Usage:

..
  
  .. code-block:: bash
  
    python validation.py [-c] [-h] [-v] [-o <nOMP>] [-m <nMPI>] [-b <bench> [-g | -s]] [-r <nRestarts>]
  
  * | Option ``-b <bench>``:  
    | ``<bench>`` : benchmark(s) to validate. Accepts wildcards.  
    | ``<bench>=?`` : ask input for a benchmark  
    | DEFAULT : All benchmarks are validated.   
  
  * | Option ``-o <nOMP>``:
    | ``<nOMP>`` : number of OpenMP threads used for the execution
    | DEFAULT : 4  
  
  * | Option ``-m <nMPI>``:
    | ``<nMPI>`` : number of MPI processes used for the execution
    | DEFAULT : 4
  
  * Option ``-g``: Generation of references only (no validation)
  * Option ``-s``: Plot differences with references only (no validation)
  * Option ``-c``: Compilation only (no run, no validation)
  * Option ``-r <nRrestarts>``: Force the simulation to be broken in several restarts.
  * Option ``-v``: Verbose
  * Option ``-h``: Help


Exit status of the script:

..
  
  * 0  validated
  * 1  validation fails
  * 2  execution fails
  * 3  compilation fails
  * 4  bad option


Examples:

..
  
  .. code-block:: bash
  
    ./validation.py -v
  
  Compiles and validates all cases in verbose mode.
  
  .. code-block:: bash
  
    ./validation.py -v -b tst1d_00_em_propagation.py 
  
  Validates only the benchmark ``tst1d_00_em_propagation.py``.
  
  .. code-block:: bash
  
    ./validation.py -v -b tst1d_00_em_propagation.py -g
  
  Generates the reference file for the benchmark ``tst1d_00_em_propagation.py``.
  
  .. code-block:: bash
  
    ./validation.py -v -b tst1d_00_em_propagation.py -s
  
  Runs the benchmark ``tst1d_00_em_propagation.py``, and plots the differences with the reference file.



.. rubric:: What does ``validation.py`` actually do?

It creates a new ``validation/workdirs`` directory (that may be freely deleted later).

It compiles the code:

..

  If the "workdirs" directory lacks a smilei binary, or it is too old,
  then the "workdirs" is backed up, and a new compilation occurs.
  The compilation output is logged in ``compilation_output``.
  If compiling errors occur, ``compilation_errors`` is created and the script exits with status 3.

It runs each benchmark:

..

  If the directory ``wd_<benchmark>/<o>/<m>`` does not exist then:
  
  * it is created.
  * ``smilei`` is executed in that directory for the requested benchmark.
  * if execution fails, the script exits with status 2.

It analyses the results (for each requested benchmark) using the ``validate_*`` script:

..

  * If requested to compare to previous references (default option), the analysis
    is compared to the reference data.
  * If requested to generate references (option ``-g``), the analysis is stored
    as reference data.
  * If requested to show differences to previous references (option ``-s``),
    the analysis is plotted vs. the reference data.


.. rubric:: How should I make the ``validate_*`` script?

The ``validate_*`` script should load the simulation results using whatever means suits
the benchmark the best. In many cases, the :doc:`happi <post-processing>` module is
employed to extract diagnostics results.

Any *python* instructions may be used to process the simulation results. Once the data
has been crunched into a meaningful value, string, or array, then it must be passed to the
following predefined function:

.. py:method:: Validate( description, data, epsilon )

  * ``description``: a string describing the data
  * ``data``: a float, a *numpy* float array, or any other python data
  * ``epsilon`` (optional): acceptable difference between data and reference

The ``data`` passed to this function constitutes the *analysis* that is compared to previous
reference files. It is the same analysis that is used to generate those reference files
in the first place.
