doc/Sphinx/installation.rst, before:

Install
-------

Before installing :program:`Smilei`, you need to install a few dependencies:

* A C++11 compiler, optionally implementing openMP
* an MPI library (it is strongly recommended to have a version supporting ``MPI_THREAD_MULTIPLE``)
* an HDF5 library compatible with your versions of C++ and MPI
* Python 2.7 or Python 3 (with header files)

Optional dependencies are:

* Git
* Python modules: sphinx, h5py, numpy, matplotlib, pylab, pint
* ffmpeg
* the `Picsar <http://picsar.net>`_ library: see :doc:`this documentation<install_PICSAR>`

----

Install the dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There are various ways to install all dependencies, depending on the platform:

* :doc:`On MacOs<install_macos>`
* :doc:`On Linux<install_linux>`
* :doc:`On a supercomputer<install_supercomputer>`

The command ``make help`` can give you some information about your environment.

If you have successfully installed these dependencies on other platforms, please
:doc:`contact us <partners>` and share!

----

.. _compile:

Download and compile
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. Download the latest :program:`Smilei` tarball :ref:`here <latestVersion>`.

#. Extract the tarball at the location of your choice.
   Let us assume it is located in your home directory ``~/smilei/``.

#. In a terminal, go to that location and compile:

   .. code-block:: bash

     cd ~/smilei
     make

#. The next step is to :doc:`write a namelist <namelist>`.

----

Advanced compilation options
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Several ``make`` options are available:

.. code-block:: bash

  make -j 4                    # Compiles with 4 procs (fast compilation)
  make config=debug            # With debugging output (slow execution)
  make config=noopenmp         # Without OpenMP support
  make config="debug noopenmp" # With debugging output, without OpenMP
  make print-XXX               # Prints the value of makefile variable XXX
  make env                     # Prints the values of all makefile variables
  make help                    # Gets some help on compilation
  sed -i 's/PICSAR=FALSE/PICSAR=TRUE/g' makefile; make -j4 #To enable calls for PSATD solver from picsar


----

Machine-specific compilation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Each machine may require a specific configuration (environment variables, modules, etc.).
Such instructions may be included, from a file of your choice, via the ``machine`` argument:

.. code-block:: bash

  make machine=my_machine_file

where ``my_machine_file`` is a file, located in ``scripts/CompileTools/machine``, containing
the lines of command to be executed before compilation.

If you successfully write such a file for a common supercomputer, please share it
with developpers so that it can be included in the next release of :program:`Smilei`.

----

Compilation options for profiling/tracing tools
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Several ``make`` options are available in order to compile Smilei ready for
specific performance analysis and debugging tools:

- Scalasca
- Intel Advisor
- Intel Vtune
- Intel Inspector

.. code-block:: bash

  make config="scalasca"   # compilation for scalasca (required the Scalasca profiler)
  make config="advisor"    # compilation for Intel Advisor (required the Intel suite)
  make config="vtune"      # compilation for Intel Vtune (required the Intel suite)
  make config="inspector"  # compilation for Intel Inspector (required the Intel suite)

----

Compilation options for detailed timers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The code contains optional timers for a more detailed timing
characterization. They are more intrusive
and may impact the overall performance.

.. code-block:: bash

  make config="detailed_timers" # compilation with detailed timers

Additional timers will be shown at the end of the simulation and are also
in ``profile.txt``

----

Create the documentation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you have installed the python module ``sphinx``, you can create the documentation
(which you are currently reading) with:

.. code-block:: bash

   make doc

This creates a local *html* website accessible in your ``build/html/`` folder.

----

.. _installModule:

Install the happi module
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A python module, ``happi``, is provided to view, extract and post-process data from
all the diagnostics.
There are several ways to load this module in python.

1. Recommended:

  .. code-block:: bash

    make happi

  This has to be done only once, unless you move the smilei directory elsewhere.
  This command creates a small file in the Python *user-site* directory that tells python
  where to find the module.
  To remove it use the command ``make uninstall_happi``.

  The module will directly be accessible from *python*::

    >>> import happi

2. Alternative: Execute the ``Diagnostics.py`` script from python

  Adding a new *python* module is not always possible.
  Instead, we provide the script ``Diagnostics.py`` which is able to find the ``happi``
  module and import it into *python*.

  You may add the following command in your own python script::

    >>> execfile("/path/to/Smilei/scripts/Diagnostics.py")

Commit message:

Doc about simd compiler options

doc/Sphinx/installation.rst, after:

Install
-------

Before installing :program:`Smilei`, you need to install a few dependencies:

* A C++11 compiler, optionally implementing openMP
* an MPI library (it is strongly recommended to have a version supporting ``MPI_THREAD_MULTIPLE``)
* an HDF5 library compatible with your versions of C++ and MPI
* Python 2.7 or Python 3 (with header files)

Optional dependencies are:

* Git
* Python modules: sphinx, h5py, numpy, matplotlib, pylab, pint
* ffmpeg
* the `Picsar <http://picsar.net>`_ library: see :doc:`this documentation<install_PICSAR>`

----

Install the dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There are various ways to install all dependencies, depending on the platform:

* :doc:`On MacOs<install_macos>`
* :doc:`On Linux<install_linux>`
* :doc:`On a supercomputer<install_supercomputer>`

The command ``make help`` can give you some information about your environment.

If you have successfully installed these dependencies on other platforms, please
:doc:`contact us <partners>` and share!

----

.. _compile:

Download and compile
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. Download the latest :program:`Smilei` tarball :ref:`here <latestVersion>`.

#. Extract the tarball at the location of your choice.
   Let us assume it is located in your home directory ``~/smilei/``.

#. In a terminal, go to that location and compile:

   .. code-block:: bash

     cd ~/smilei
     make

The SIMD vectorization of :program:`Smilei` uses ``#pragma omp simd``, to be enabled you need appropriates compiler and options.

For instantance, :program:`Smilei` has been developed and tested on Intel processors (Skylake 8168) with an Intel environment with the following flags :

   .. code-block:: bash
      
     -fopenmp -xCOMMON-AVX512 -ip -ipo -inline-factor=1000 -D__INTEL_SKYLAKE_8168

The ``-fopenmp`` is set by default in all mode except ``config=noopenmp``.

#. The next step is to :doc:`write a namelist <namelist>`.

----

Advanced compilation options
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Several ``make`` options are available:

.. code-block:: bash

  make -j 4                    # Compiles with 4 procs (fast compilation)
  make config=debug            # With debugging output (slow execution)
  make config=noopenmp         # Without OpenMP support
  make config="debug noopenmp" # With debugging output, without OpenMP
  make print-XXX               # Prints the value of makefile variable XXX
  make env                     # Prints the values of all makefile variables
  make help                    # Gets some help on compilation
  sed -i 's/PICSAR=FALSE/PICSAR=TRUE/g' makefile; make -j4 #To enable calls for PSATD solver from picsar


----

Machine-specific compilation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Each machine may require a specific configuration (environment variables, modules, etc.).
Such instructions may be included, from a file of your choice, via the ``machine`` argument:

.. code-block:: bash

  make machine=my_machine_file

where ``my_machine_file`` is a file, located in ``scripts/CompileTools/machine``, containing
the lines of command to be executed before compilation.

If you successfully write such a file for a common supercomputer, please share it
with developpers so that it can be included in the next release of :program:`Smilei`.

----

Compilation options for profiling/tracing tools
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Several ``make`` options are available in order to compile Smilei ready for
specific performance analysis and debugging tools:

- Scalasca
- Intel Advisor
- Intel Vtune
- Intel Inspector

.. code-block:: bash

  make config="scalasca"   # compilation for scalasca (required the Scalasca profiler)
  make config="advisor"    # compilation for Intel Advisor (required the Intel suite)
  make config="vtune"      # compilation for Intel Vtune (required the Intel suite)
  make config="inspector"  # compilation for Intel Inspector (required the Intel suite)

----

Compilation options for detailed timers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The code contains optional timers for a more detailed timing
characterization. They are more intrusive
and may impact the overall performance.

.. code-block:: bash

  make config="detailed_timers" # compilation with detailed timers

Additional timers will be shown at the end of the simulation and are also
in ``profile.txt``

----

Create the documentation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you have installed the python module ``sphinx``, you can create the documentation
(which you are currently reading) with:

.. code-block:: bash

   make doc

This creates a local *html* website accessible in your ``build/html/`` folder.

----

.. _installModule:

Install the happi module
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A python module, ``happi``, is provided to view, extract and post-process data from
all the diagnostics.
There are several ways to load this module in python.

1. Recommended:

  .. code-block:: bash

    make happi

  This has to be done only once, unless you move the smilei directory elsewhere.
  This command creates a small file in the Python *user-site* directory that tells python
  where to find the module.
  To remove it use the command ``make uninstall_happi``.

  The module will directly be accessible from *python*::

    >>> import happi

2. Alternative: Execute the ``Diagnostics.py`` script from python

  Adding a new *python* module is not always possible.
  Instead, we provide the script ``Diagnostics.py`` which is able to find the ``happi``
  module and import it into *python*.

  You may add the following command in your own python script::

    >>> execfile("/path/to/Smilei/scripts/Diagnostics.py")
