doc/Sphinx/material.rst, before:

Publications
------------

.. rst-class:: emphlink

  Tip: :ref:`How should I cite Smilei in my publication? <HowToCite>`

.. rst-class:: emphlink

  Tip: :ref:`How can I add my publication to this list? <HowToListMyPaper>`


----

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

  .. [Derouillat2018]

     J. Derouillat, A. Beck, F. Pérez, T. Vinci, M. Chiaramello, A. Grassi, M. Flé, G. Bouchard, I. Plotnikov, N. Aunai, J. Dargent, C. Riconda and M. Grech,
     `SMILEI: a collaborative, open-source, multi-purpose particle-in-cell code for plasma simulation`,
     `Comput. Phys. Commun. 222, 351-373 (2018) <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2017.09.024>`_,
     `arXiv:1702.05128 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.05128>`_

----

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Gelfer]

  E. Gelfer, A. Fedotov and S. Weber,
  `Radiation induced acceleration of ions`,
  `arXiv:1907.02621 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.02621>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Thiele]

  I. Thiele and E. Siminos,
  `Laser wakefield driven generation of isolated CEP-tunable intense sub-cycle pulses`,
  `arXiv:1902.05014 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.05014>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Derouillat]

  J. Derouillat and A. Beck,
  `Single Domain Multiple Decompositions for Particle-in-Cell simulations`,
  `arXiv:1912.04064 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.04064>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Massimo2020]

  F. Massimo, I. Zemzemi, A. Beck, J. Derouillat and A. Specka,
  `Efficient cylindrical envelope modeling for laser wakefield acceleration`,
  `arXiv:1912.04674 <http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.04674>`_

----

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Marcowith2020]

  A. Marcowith, G. Ferrand, M. Grech, Z. Meliani, I. Plotnikov and R. Walder,
  `Multi-scale simulations of particle acceleration in astrophysical systems`,
  `Living Reviews in Computational Astrophysics 6, 1 (2020) <https://doi.org/10.1007/s41115-020-0007-6>`_,
  `arXiv:2002.09411 <https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.09411>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Dargent2020]

  J. Dargent, N. Aunai, B. Lavraud, S. Toledo-Redondo and F. Califano,
  `Simulation of Plasmaspheric Plume Impact on Dayside Magnetic Reconnection`,
  `Geophys. Res. Lett. 47, e2019GL086546 (2020) <https://doi.org/10.1029/2019GL086546>`_,
  `arXiv:2002.02243 <https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.02243>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Sundström2020]

  A. Sundström, L. Gremillet, E. Siminos and I. Pusztai,
  `Fast collisional electron heating and relaxation in thin foils driven by a circularly polarized ultraintense short-pulse laser`,
  `J. Plasma Phys. 86, 755860201 (2020) <https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022377820000264>`_,
  `arXiv:1911.09562 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.09562>`_


.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Gelfer2020]

  E. Gelfer, A. Fedotov, O. Klimo and S. Weber,
  `Absorption and opacity threshold for a thin foil in a strong circularly polarized laser field`,
  `Phys. Rev. E 101, 033204 (2020) <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.101.033204>`_,
  `arXiv:1906.05902 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.05902>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Ferri2020]

  J. Ferri, I. Thiele, E. Siminos, L. Gremillet, E. Smetania, A. Dmitriev, G. Cantono, C.-G. Wahlström and T. Fülöp,
  `Enhancement of laser-driven ion acceleration in non-periodic nanostructured targets`,
  `J. Plasma Phys. 86, 905860101 (2020) <https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022377819000898>`_,
  `arXiv:1905.11131 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.11131>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Peng2019]

  H. Peng, C. Riconda, M. Grech and S. Weber,
  `Nonlinear dynamics of laser-generated ion-plasma gratings: A unified description`,
  `Phys. Rev. E 100, 061201(R) (2019) <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.100.061201>`_,
  `arXiv:1911.03440 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.03440>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Fang2019]

  Jun Fang, Chun-Yan Lu, Jing-Wen Yan and Huan Yu,
  `Early acceleration of electrons and protons at the nonrelativistic quasiparallel shocks with different obliquity angles`,
  `Res. Astron. Astrophys. 19, 182 (2019) <https://doi.org/10.1088/1674-4527/19/12/182>`_,
  `arXiv:1908.08170 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.08170>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Yoon2019b]

  Young Dae Yoon and P. M. Bellan,
  `Kinetic Verification of the Stochastic Ion Heating Mechanism in Collisionless Magnetic Reconnection`,
  `ApJL 887, L29 (2019) <https://doi.org/10.3847/2041-8213/ab5b0a>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Yoon2019a]

  Young Dae Yoon and P. M. Bellan,
  `The electron canonical battery effect in magneticreconnection: Completion of the electroncanonical vorticity framework`,
  `Phys. Plasmas 26, 100702 (2019) <https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5122225>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Massimo2019]

  F. Massimo, A. Beck, J. Derouillat, M. Grech, M. Lobet, F. Pérez, I. Zemzemi and A. Specka,
  `Efficient start-to-end 3D envelope modeling for two-stage laser wakefield acceleration experiments`,
  `Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 61, 124001 (2019) <https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1361-6587/ab49cf>`_,
  `arXiv:1912.04127 <http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.04127>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Beck2019]

  A. Beck, J. Dérouillat, M. Lobet, A. Farjallah, F. Massimo, I. Zemzemi, F. Perez, T. Vinci and M. Grech,
  `Adaptive SIMD optimizations in particle-in-cell codes with fine-grain particle sorting`,
  `Comput. Phys. Commun. 244, 246 (2019) <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2019.05.001>`_,
  `arXiv:1810.03949 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.03949>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Perez2019]

  F. Pérez and M. Grech,
  `Oblique-incidence, arbitrary-profile wave injection for electromagnetic simulations`,
  `Phys. Rev. E 99, 033307 (2019) <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.99.033307>`_,
  `arXiv:1809.04435 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.04435>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Thiele2019]

  I. Thiele, E. Siminos and T. Fülöp,
  `Electron beam driven generation of frequency-tunable isolated relativistic sub-cycle pulses`,
  `Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 104803 (2019) <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.104803>`_,
  `arXiv:1806.04976 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.04976>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Niel2018b]

   F. Niel, C. Riconda, F. Amiranoff, M. Lobet, J. Derouillat, F. Pérez, T. Vinci and M. Grech
   `From quantum to classical modelling of radiation reaction: a focus on the radiation spectrum`,
   `Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 60, 094002 (2018) <http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1361-6587/aace22>`_,
   `arXiv:1802.02927 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.02927>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Plotnikov2017]

    I. Plotnikov, A. Grassi and M. Grech,
    `Perpendicular relativistic shocks in magnetized pair plasma`,
    `Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 477, 5238 (2018) <https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/477/4/5238/4978470>`_,
    `arXiv:1712.02883 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.02883>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Niel2018a]

   F. Niel, C. Riconda, F. Amiranoff, R. Duclous and M. Grech,
   `From quantum to classical modelling of radiation reaction: a focus on stochasticity effects`,
   `Phys. Rev. E 97, 043209 (2018) <https://journals.aps.org/pre/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevE.97.043209>`_,
   `arXiv:1707.02618 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.02618>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Grassi2017b]

   A. Grassi, M. Grech, F. Amiranoff, A. Macchi and C. Riconda,
   `Radiation-pressure-driven ion Weibel instability and collisionless shocks`,
   `Phys. Rev. E 96, 033204 (2017) <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.96.033204>`_,
   `arXiv:1705.05402 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.05402>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Fedeli2017]

   L. Fedeli, A. Formenti, L. Cialfi, A. Sgattoni, G. Cantono and M. Passoni,
   `Structured targets for advanced laser-driven sources`,
   `Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 60, 014013 (2017) <http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1361-6587/aa8a54/meta>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Golovanov2017]

   A. A. Golovanov, I. Yu. Kostyukov, J. Thomas and A. Pukhov,
   `Analytic model for electromagnetic fields in the bubble regime of plasma wakefield in non-uniform plasmas`,
   `Phys. Plasmas 24, (2017) <http://aip.scitation.org/doi/full/10.1063/1.4996856>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Dargent2017]

   J. Dargent, N. Aunai, S. Toledo-Redondo, M. A. Shay, P. A. Cassak and K. Malakit,
   `Kinetic simulation of asymmetric magnetic reconnection with cold ions`,
   `J. Geophys. Res.: Space Phys. 122, 5290 (2017) <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2016JA023831/full>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Grassi2017a]

   A. Grassi, M. Grech, F. Amiranoff, F. Pegoraro, A. Macchi and C. Riconda,
   `Electron Weibel instability in relativistic counterstreaming plasmas with flow-aligned external magnetic fields`,
   `Phys. Rev. E 95, 023203 (2017) <https://journals.aps.org/pre/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevE.95.023203>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Dargent2016]

   J. Dargent, N. Aunai, G. Belmont, N. Dorville, B. Lavraud and M. Hesse,
   `Full particle-in-cell simulations of kinetic equilibria and the role of the initial current sheet on steady asymmetric magnetic reconnection`,
   `J. Plasma Phys. 82, 905820305 (2016) <https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-plasma-physics/article/full-particleincell-simulations-of-kinetic-equilibria-and-the-role-of-the-initial-current-sheet-on-steady-asymmetric-magnetic-reconnection/6426B214AF7ABB34C2DA81BC60FE3EBC>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Chiaramello2016]

   M. Chiaramello, C. Riconda, F. Amiranoff, J. Fuchs, M. Grech, L. Lancia,
   J.-R. Marquès, T. Vinci and S. Weber,
   `Optimization of interaction conditions
   for efficient short laser pulse amplification by Stimulated Brillouin Scattering
   in the Strongly Coupled regime`,
   `Phys. Plasmas 23, 072103 (2016) <http://scitation.aip.org/content/aip/journal/pop/23/7/10.1063/1.4955322>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Beck2016]

   A. Beck, J. Trier Frederiksen and J. Derouillat,
   `Load management strategy for Particle-In-Cell simulations in high energy physics`,
   `Nucl. Inst. Meth. in Phys. Res. A (2016) <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0168900216301577>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Lancia2016]

   L. Lancia, A. Giribono, L. Vassura, M. Chiaramello, C. Riconda, S. Weber, A. Castan, A. Chatelain, A. Frank, T. 	Gangolf, M. N. Quinn, J. Fuchs and J.-R. Marquès,
   `Signatures of the self-similar regime of strongly coupled stimulated brillouin scattering for efficient short laser pulse amplification`,
   `Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 075001 (2016) <http://journals.aps.org/prl/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.075001>`_

Commit message:

add arXiv manuscript on envelope ionization, add envelope ionization in the new features

doc/Sphinx/material.rst, after:

Publications
------------

.. rst-class:: emphlink

  Tip: :ref:`How should I cite Smilei in my publication? <HowToCite>`

.. rst-class:: emphlink

  Tip: :ref:`How can I add my publication to this list? <HowToListMyPaper>`


----

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

  .. [Derouillat2018]

     J. Derouillat, A. Beck, F. Pérez, T. Vinci, M. Chiaramello, A. Grassi, M. Flé, G. Bouchard, I. Plotnikov, N. Aunai, J. Dargent, C. Riconda and M. Grech,
     `SMILEI: a collaborative, open-source, multi-purpose particle-in-cell code for plasma simulation`,
     `Comput. Phys. Commun. 222, 351-373 (2018) <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2017.09.024>`_,
     `arXiv:1702.05128 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.05128>`_

----

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Gelfer]

  E. Gelfer, A. Fedotov and S. Weber,
  `Radiation induced acceleration of ions`,
  `arXiv:1907.02621 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.02621>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Thiele]

  I. Thiele and E. Siminos,
  `Laser wakefield driven generation of isolated CEP-tunable intense sub-cycle pulses`,
  `arXiv:1902.05014 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.05014>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Derouillat]

  J. Derouillat and A. Beck,
  `Single Domain Multiple Decompositions for Particle-in-Cell simulations`,
  `arXiv:1912.04064 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.04064>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Massimo2020]

  F. Massimo, I. Zemzemi, A. Beck, J. Derouillat and A. Specka,
  `Efficient cylindrical envelope modeling for laser wakefield acceleration`,
  `arXiv:1912.04674 <http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.04674>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [MassimoIonization2020]

  F. Massimo, A. Beck, J. Derouillat, I. Zemzemi and A. Specka,
  `Numerical modeling of laser tunneling ionization in Particle in Cell Codes with a laser envelope model`,
  `arXiv:2006.04433 <https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.04433>`_

----

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Marcowith2020]

  A. Marcowith, G. Ferrand, M. Grech, Z. Meliani, I. Plotnikov and R. Walder,
  `Multi-scale simulations of particle acceleration in astrophysical systems`,
  `Living Reviews in Computational Astrophysics 6, 1 (2020) <https://doi.org/10.1007/s41115-020-0007-6>`_,
  `arXiv:2002.09411 <https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.09411>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Dargent2020]

  J. Dargent, N. Aunai, B. Lavraud, S. Toledo-Redondo and F. Califano,
  `Simulation of Plasmaspheric Plume Impact on Dayside Magnetic Reconnection`,
  `Geophys. Res. Lett. 47, e2019GL086546 (2020) <https://doi.org/10.1029/2019GL086546>`_,
  `arXiv:2002.02243 <https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.02243>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Sundström2020]

  A. Sundström, L. Gremillet, E. Siminos and I. Pusztai,
  `Fast collisional electron heating and relaxation in thin foils driven by a circularly polarized ultraintense short-pulse laser`,
  `J. Plasma Phys. 86, 755860201 (2020) <https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022377820000264>`_,
  `arXiv:1911.09562 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.09562>`_


.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Gelfer2020]

  E. Gelfer, A. Fedotov, O. Klimo and S. Weber,
  `Absorption and opacity threshold for a thin foil in a strong circularly polarized laser field`,
  `Phys. Rev. E 101, 033204 (2020) <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.101.033204>`_,
  `arXiv:1906.05902 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.05902>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Ferri2020]

  J. Ferri, I. Thiele, E. Siminos, L. Gremillet, E. Smetania, A. Dmitriev, G. Cantono, C.-G. Wahlström and T. Fülöp,
  `Enhancement of laser-driven ion acceleration in non-periodic nanostructured targets`,
  `J. Plasma Phys. 86, 905860101 (2020) <https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022377819000898>`_,
  `arXiv:1905.11131 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.11131>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Peng2019]

  H. Peng, C. Riconda, M. Grech and S. Weber,
  `Nonlinear dynamics of laser-generated ion-plasma gratings: A unified description`,
  `Phys. Rev. E 100, 061201(R) (2019) <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.100.061201>`_,
  `arXiv:1911.03440 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.03440>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Fang2019]

  Jun Fang, Chun-Yan Lu, Jing-Wen Yan and Huan Yu,
  `Early acceleration of electrons and protons at the nonrelativistic quasiparallel shocks with different obliquity angles`,
  `Res. Astron. Astrophys. 19, 182 (2019) <https://doi.org/10.1088/1674-4527/19/12/182>`_,
  `arXiv:1908.08170 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.08170>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Yoon2019b]

  Young Dae Yoon and P. M. Bellan,
  `Kinetic Verification of the Stochastic Ion Heating Mechanism in Collisionless Magnetic Reconnection`,
  `ApJL 887, L29 (2019) <https://doi.org/10.3847/2041-8213/ab5b0a>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Yoon2019a]

  Young Dae Yoon and P. M. Bellan,
  `The electron canonical battery effect in magneticreconnection: Completion of the electroncanonical vorticity framework`,
  `Phys. Plasmas 26, 100702 (2019) <https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5122225>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Massimo2019]

  F. Massimo, A. Beck, J. Derouillat, M. Grech, M. Lobet, F. Pérez, I. Zemzemi and A. Specka,
  `Efficient start-to-end 3D envelope modeling for two-stage laser wakefield acceleration experiments`,
  `Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 61, 124001 (2019) <https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1361-6587/ab49cf>`_,
  `arXiv:1912.04127 <http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.04127>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Beck2019]

  A. Beck, J. Dérouillat, M. Lobet, A. Farjallah, F. Massimo, I. Zemzemi, F. Perez, T. Vinci and M. Grech,
  `Adaptive SIMD optimizations in particle-in-cell codes with fine-grain particle sorting`,
  `Comput. Phys. Commun. 244, 246 (2019) <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2019.05.001>`_,
  `arXiv:1810.03949 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.03949>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Perez2019]

  F. Pérez and M. Grech,
  `Oblique-incidence, arbitrary-profile wave injection for electromagnetic simulations`,
  `Phys. Rev. E 99, 033307 (2019) <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.99.033307>`_,
  `arXiv:1809.04435 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.04435>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Thiele2019]

  I. Thiele, E. Siminos and T. Fülöp,
  `Electron beam driven generation of frequency-tunable isolated relativistic sub-cycle pulses`,
  `Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 104803 (2019) <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.104803>`_,
  `arXiv:1806.04976 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.04976>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Niel2018b]

   F. Niel, C. Riconda, F. Amiranoff, M. Lobet, J. Derouillat, F. Pérez, T. Vinci and M. Grech
   `From quantum to classical modelling of radiation reaction: a focus on the radiation spectrum`,
   `Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 60, 094002 (2018) <http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1361-6587/aace22>`_,
   `arXiv:1802.02927 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.02927>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Plotnikov2017]

    I. Plotnikov, A. Grassi and M. Grech,
    `Perpendicular relativistic shocks in magnetized pair plasma`,
    `Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 477, 5238 (2018) <https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/477/4/5238/4978470>`_,
    `arXiv:1712.02883 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.02883>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Niel2018a]

   F. Niel, C. Riconda, F. Amiranoff, R. Duclous and M. Grech,
   `From quantum to classical modelling of radiation reaction: a focus on stochasticity effects`,
   `Phys. Rev. E 97, 043209 (2018) <https://journals.aps.org/pre/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevE.97.043209>`_,
   `arXiv:1707.02618 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.02618>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Grassi2017b]

   A. Grassi, M. Grech, F. Amiranoff, A. Macchi and C. Riconda,
   `Radiation-pressure-driven ion Weibel instability and collisionless shocks`,
   `Phys. Rev. E 96, 033204 (2017) <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.96.033204>`_,
   `arXiv:1705.05402 <https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.05402>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Fedeli2017]

   L. Fedeli, A. Formenti, L. Cialfi, A. Sgattoni, G. Cantono and M. Passoni,
   `Structured targets for advanced laser-driven sources`,
   `Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 60, 014013 (2017) <http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1361-6587/aa8a54/meta>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Golovanov2017]

   A. A. Golovanov, I. Yu. Kostyukov, J. Thomas and A. Pukhov,
   `Analytic model for electromagnetic fields in the bubble regime of plasma wakefield in non-uniform plasmas`,
   `Phys. Plasmas 24, (2017) <http://aip.scitation.org/doi/full/10.1063/1.4996856>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Dargent2017]

   J. Dargent, N. Aunai, S. Toledo-Redondo, M. A. Shay, P. A. Cassak and K. Malakit,
   `Kinetic simulation of asymmetric magnetic reconnection with cold ions`,
   `J. Geophys. Res.: Space Phys. 122, 5290 (2017) <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2016JA023831/full>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Grassi2017a]

   A. Grassi, M. Grech, F. Amiranoff, F. Pegoraro, A. Macchi and C. Riconda,
   `Electron Weibel instability in relativistic counterstreaming plasmas with flow-aligned external magnetic fields`,
   `Phys. Rev. E 95, 023203 (2017) <https://journals.aps.org/pre/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevE.95.023203>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Dargent2016]

   J. Dargent, N. Aunai, G. Belmont, N. Dorville, B. Lavraud and M. Hesse,
   `Full particle-in-cell simulations of kinetic equilibria and the role of the initial current sheet on steady asymmetric magnetic reconnection`,
   `J. Plasma Phys. 82, 905820305 (2016) <https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-plasma-physics/article/full-particleincell-simulations-of-kinetic-equilibria-and-the-role-of-the-initial-current-sheet-on-steady-asymmetric-magnetic-reconnection/6426B214AF7ABB34C2DA81BC60FE3EBC>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Chiaramello2016]

   M. Chiaramello, C. Riconda, F. Amiranoff, J. Fuchs, M. Grech, L. Lancia,
   J.-R. Marquès, T. Vinci and S. Weber,
   `Optimization of interaction conditions
   for efficient short laser pulse amplification by Stimulated Brillouin Scattering
   in the Strongly Coupled regime`,
   `Phys. Plasmas 23, 072103 (2016) <http://scitation.aip.org/content/aip/journal/pop/23/7/10.1063/1.4955322>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Beck2016]

   A. Beck, J. Trier Frederiksen and J. Derouillat,
   `Load management strategy for Particle-In-Cell simulations in high energy physics`,
   `Nucl. Inst. Meth. in Phys. Res. A (2016) <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0168900216301577>`_

.. rst-class:: bigcitation

.. [Lancia2016]

   L. Lancia, A. Giribono, L. Vassura, M. Chiaramello, C. Riconda, S. Weber, A. Castan, A. Chatelain, A. Frank, T. 	Gangolf, M. N. Quinn, J. Fuchs and J.-R. Marquès,
   `Signatures of the self-similar regime of strongly coupled stimulated brillouin scattering for efficient short laser pulse amplification`,
   `Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 075001 (2016) <http://journals.aps.org/prl/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.075001>`_
