doc/Sphinx/synopsis.rst, before:

Synopsis
--------

Smilei is a collaborative project providing the scientific community with an open-source,
user-friendly, high-performance and multi-purpose Particle-In-Cell (PIC) code
for plasma simulation.

To face the diverse needs of the Smilei community, the code is developed in C++,
based on an object-oriented architecture. Its modularity and user-friendly Python
interface allows to run simulations in various dimensions (Cartesian 1D, 2D, 3D),
to chose between various Maxwell solvers, particle pushers, interpolators, projectors, etc.
A whole set of run-time diagnostics (based on HDF5) and user-friendly (Python)
:doc:`post-processing <post-processing>` tools complements the code.

Co-developed by HPC specialists and physicists, Smilei is designed for high performances
on massively-parallel super-computers. It benefits from a state-of-the-art hybrid
MPI/OpenMP parallelization, dynamic load balancing and SIMD vectorization.
It has been successfully tested on various architectures among which the most recent
Intel Skylake (SKL) & Knigths Landing (KNL).

In Smilei, Maxwell’s equations are solved using a Yee mesh with centered
electric and magnetic fields following the finite-difference time-domain (FDTD)
method or related methods. A pseudo-spectral analytical time domain method is
also available as an experimental feature.
Charge deposition follows a charge-conservation scheme.

As a multi-purpose code, Smilei is applied to a wide range of physics-related studies:
from relativistic laser-plasma interaction to astrophysics. Smilei thus benefits from
various additional physics modules among which :ref:`field ionization <field_ionization>`,
:doc:`binary collisions and impact ionization <collisions>`. QED processes, such as
high-energy photon emission and its :doc:`back-reaction <radiation_loss>`
on the electron dynamics, as well as
:doc:`pair production <multiphoton_Breit_Wheeler>` through the Breit-Wheeler
process, are also included.

A detailed account of Smilei's capabilities is given in
`this article <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2017.09.024>`_.

Commit message:

update architectures, geometries and material reference

doc/Sphinx/synopsis.rst, after:

Synopsis
--------

Smilei is a collaborative project providing the scientific community with an open-source,
user-friendly, high-performance and multi-purpose Particle-In-Cell (PIC) code
for plasma simulation.

To face the diverse needs of the Smilei community, the code is developed in C++,
based on an object-oriented architecture. Its modularity and user-friendly Python
interface allows to run simulations in various geometries (Cartesian 1D, 2D, 3D or cylindrical with decomposition into azimuthal modes),
to implement laser or plasma profile with any python function, 
to chose between various Maxwell solvers, particle pushers, interpolators, projectors and more !
A whole set of run-time diagnostics (outputs in HDF5) and user-friendly (Python)
:doc:`post-processing <post-processing>` tools complements the code.

Co-developed by HPC specialists and physicists, Smilei is designed for high performances
on massively-parallel super-computers. It benefits from a state-of-the-art hybrid
MPI/OpenMP parallelization, dynamic load balancing and SIMD vectorization.
It has been successfully tested on various architectures among which the most recent
Intel Cascadelake (CSL) & Fujitsu A64FX (ARM).

In Smilei, Maxwell’s equations are solved using a Yee mesh with centered
electric and magnetic fields following the finite-difference time-domain (FDTD)
method or related methods. A pseudo-spectral analytical time domain method is
also available as an experimental feature.
Charge deposition follows a charge-conservation scheme.

As a multi-purpose code, Smilei is applied to a wide range of physics-related studies:
from relativistic laser-plasma interaction to astrophysics. Smilei thus benefits from
various additional physics modules among which :ref:`field ionization <field_ionization>`,
:doc:`binary collisions and impact ionization <collisions>`. QED processes, such as
high-energy photon emission and its :doc:`back-reaction <radiation_loss>`
on the electron dynamics, as well as
:doc:`pair production <multiphoton_Breit_Wheeler>` through the Breit-Wheeler
process, are also included.

A detailed account of Smilei's capabilities is given in
`this article <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2017.09.024>`_.
For publications on more advanced features, please refer to the :doc:`material` section of this documentation.
